---
last_revised: 2014-12-10
layout: page
slug: the-case-for-swap
published: true
date: 2011-11-25
status: publish
title: The Case for Swap
tags: []
type: page
updated: 2022-12-01T22:28:29.869Z
categories: []
aliases:
  - /essays/the-case-for-swap/
---
<aside class="information">
<b>Note from 2022</b>: this article is old and still relevant, but Chris Down's "<a href="https://chrisdown.name/2018/01/02/in-defence-of-swap.html">In Defence of Swap</a>" might be a better reference for a contemporary reader, since:
<ul>
  <li>I focused primarily on the desktop use case here.</li>
  <li>Both the kernel and typical hardware have changed significantly in the intervening decade.</li>
  <li>He probably does a better job of making a convincing argument than I did.</li>
</ul>
</aside>

I frequently hear from people that they "don't need swap" because their computer
has a large amount of memory (nowadays, 4/8 GiB or even more). To a certain
extent, this is true. However, it is still important to have swap space
available in most situations.

It's true that few desktop applications require anywhere near the full capacity
of a typical modern PC's memory, and even the complete set of programs someone
might be running at a given time is unlikely to use the whole of available
memory. Keeping that in mind, it often doesn't make sense to allocate disk space
that will seemingly never be needed as virtual memory.

On the other hand, not having any place for your kernel to hold dirty pages when
memory pressure increases can severely degrade performance. I present here a
case for why you should always have some swap available, and offer some advice
on how best to allocate it.

\[I'm targeting Linux systems here, but this advice should apply to other operating systems with little modification.]

## The case for swap

Most power users are aware of the huge latency difference between physical
memory and typical spinning disks[^seek], and thus understand why allowing the
system to swap virtual memory pages out to disk[^vm] can be harmful to
performance.

[^seek]: A midrange modern processor cycles 2 billion times per second (or
    more), and a typical consumer-grade hard drive will take around 7ms to seek on a
    good day, meaning you waste 1.4 million instruction cycles waiting for data from
    the disk. By comparison, something in main memory on the same processor can be
    accessed in about 60 nanoseconds, or 120 clock cycles.

[^vm]: See [Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtual_Memory) or [this
    article](http://web.archive.org/web/20120606171634/http://distilledb.com:80/blog/archives/date/2009/02/22/swap-files-in-linux.page)
    for a primer on how virtual memory works.

\[If you don't understand how virtual memory works and ignored that footnote in
the previous sentence, read that then come back.]

What many users seem to ignore is that the operating system developers also know
that there's a large penalty involved with swapping data out to disk, so they
will design the system to only swap when it is advantageous. If your system is
swapping a lot (such as if there's a lot of disk activity when you restore a
previously minimized application), the situation can often be improved just by
adding more memory.

Even when there's plenty of memory available, however, it's possible to see a
large perfomance hit even when there is ostensibly a large amount of free
memory.

## Disk caches

All modern operating systems are aware of the large penalties involved with
accessing non-volatile storage (anything that isn't in RAM), so they keep disk
caches in memory. On Linux, the disk caches are held in the page cache, which is
effectively the set of all virtual memory pages currently in RAM.

The memory used by the disk cache is usually reported as unused, because the
system can evict pages owned by the disk cache at will to free memory when
applications request it. When nothing else needs the memory, the system may
refer to data in the disk cache (when the desired data is indeed in the cache)
and see large speedups.

In order to keep I/O operations fast, the system might opt to swap pages owned
by one of your programs out to disk (on a UNIX system, for example, cron might
be a good candidate to swap out) in order to make the disk cache larger. This
means that the program will be slower to resume execution, but the system as a
whole will be faster until then.

## The degradation case

So, what happens when you have a very slow storage device (such as a USB thumb
drive) connected? Your operating system usually tries to cache operations on
that device a lot, since it's very slow[^flash]. If you write a lot of data to
it, the write will seem to complete much faster than is actually did, because
the system is caching those writes in RAM and actually writing to the device as
possible, which is rather slowly.

[^flash]: Oftentimes only a few megabytes per second.

So what happens when a running program requests memory from the system and RAM
is full of dirty pages waiting to be written to your slow device? The kernel
will start evicting the dirty pages and writing them to your very slow device.
Meanwhile, whatever program requested the memory is still waiting for it, unable
to act. The act of requesting memory causes a page fault, preempting the program
until the kernel can fulfill the request.

As a real-world case (the investigation of which prompted me to write this),
when I've been transferring large amounts of data to a slow USB device and
attempted to do other things, my system has come to a painful halt while the
kernel has flushed dirty pages over USB when another application (such as
Firefox) has requested more memory. It takes a long time for some memory to
become available for Firefox, during which time it fails to accept any input,
since the kernel is busy making space in main memory for it. By adding some swap
on a faster device in the system, it can swap some other things out and keep
everything running.

## How much swap?

Now that we have established that it's a good idea to have some amount of swap
available, how much should you have? There's no point in wasting disk space for
swap you're never going to use, but you want enough to be useful.

### 2 x RAM

The old guideline for Linux was to allocate twice as much swap on disk as you
have physical memory. On a modern system, following that rule can consume large
amounts of disk space to no useful effect. While storage density has increased
with time in a fashion similar to main memory capacity, the amount of space
required for swap has greatly increased relative to the amount of data a typical
user will need to store.

Taking my desktop workstation for example, it currently contains about 3
gigabytes of data which I consider irreplaceable, in a total of about 1.5
terabytes of total data. If I were to follow the old recommendations, the 16 GiB
swap space would dwarf the data which I truly value. On a system with several
terabytes of total storage, that's not a lot of space, but many gigabytes of
storage space seemingly going to waste doesn't sit well with many users (myself
included). There's got to be a better approach, and indeed there is.

### Discretionary swap

A good, simple rule of thumb for allocating swap space on a modern system is to
have as much swap as you do physical memory. For typical operating conditions,
that's still going to be much more swap than you will ever need. However, that
normally-unused space is not going to waste, because Linux uses your swap space
to store the contents of main memory when the system suspends to disk
('Hibernation' in the parlance of most end-user systems).

Of course, some users don't ever use the system's suspend-to-disk functionality.
For those situations, you'll need to use your own discretion and strike a
balance between wasted space and resistance to memory pressure. More swap will
allow the system to absorb periods of high memory pressure more gracefully (and
possibly avoid invoking the OOM killer in extreme situations), but will be
mostly idle in the lulls.

For my part, I find a 2 GB swap partition to be acceptable on my
previously-mentioned desktop workstation, yielding a total virtual memory
capacity of roughly 10 GiB. 10 GiB is more memory than I anticipate ever needing
for the system (barring the occasional buggy prototype piece of software, in
which case I should fix it anyway), but the relatively small amount of
disk-backed virtual memory can allow I/O-heavy workloads to push applications
which aren't in use out to disk to improve I/O performance.

## What about SSDs?

You may be wondering now, "But I have a solid-state disk in my system! Won't
putting swap on that wear it out?"[^ssd] You're right, but it's probably not
enough to be concerned about.

[^ssd]: Flash memory, which backs most solid-state storage on the market right
    now, can only be written some amount of times before it wears out and stops
    working properly.

Newer SSD controllers are very intelligent about wear-leveling in order to
extend the life of the memory, which is already pretty good (on the order of
100000 writes). On a 64 GiB device, that translates to an overall write
endurance of 64 petabytes before the backing memory is running out-of-spec. If
you write 64 GiB to it per day, it would require over 2000 years of operation to
reach that point.

If you're still paranoid about the lifetime of your storage device, you could
always push swap onto a spinning disk, which sidesteps the write endurance
problem at the cost of some performance.

## Conclusion

As always, there are going to be cases where the 'best practice' (having swap)
is not actually going to be best for you. However, I have tried to outline the
facts here, to allow readers to make informed decisions.

In the overwhelming majority of situations, you should have some swap available,
and if you're not happy with exactly how the system handles it, Linux has some
knobs for tweaking that behavior.[^lwn]

[^lwn]: [LWN](https://lwn.net/Articles/83588/) has a very good overview of the
    swap-tweaking knobs available in 2.6 (and later) Linux kernels.

### A Counterexample

Just to illustrate why understanding what's going on and using personal discretion is important, a counterexample:

My netbook doesn't need swap, and really shouldn't have any. I only have one
storage device in the machine, which is a very slow SSD with what is likely an
extremely simple controller (that does little to no wear-leveling). Because the
primary storage in that machine is so slow, I'm probably never going to see any
reasonable performance improvement by putting a swap partition on it. The
machine does have a couple SD card slots, however, and it might be reasonable to
put swap on an SD card.
