---
author: tari
comments: true
date: 2011-05-03 02:31:21+00:00
layout: post
slug: mkg3a
title: mkg3a
wordpress_id: 232
categories:
- Software
tags:
- Hacking/Tweaking
- Software
---

Casio's [FX-CG](http://www.casioeducation.com/prizm), or Prizm, is a rather
interesting device, and the programmers over on
[Cemetech](http://www.cemetech.net/) seem to have found it worthwhile to make
the Prizm do their bidding in software.

The Prizm device itself is based around some sort of SuperH core,
<del>identified at times in the system software as a SH7305</del> a "SH7780 or
thereabouts". The
[7780](http://www.renesas.com/products/mpumcu/superh/sh7780/index.jsp) is not an
exact device, though, and it's likely a [licensed
SH4](http://web.archive.org/web/20110605001516/http://www.renesas.com:80/products/core_license/cpu_cores/child_folder/sh4_child.jsp)
core in a Casio ASIC. Whatever the case, GCC targeted for sh and compiling
without the FPU (-m4a-nofpu) and in big-endian mode (-mb) seems to work on the
hardware provided.

Between [Jonimus](http://jonimoose.net/) and myself (with input from other users
on what configurations will work), we've assembled a GCC-based toolchain
targeting the Prizm. Jon put together a cross-compiler for sh with some
supporting scripts, while I contributed a linker script and runtime
initialization routine (crt0), both of which were adapted from
[Kristaba's](https://github.com/Kristaba) work.

With that, we can build binaries targetting sh and linked such that they'll run
on the Prizm, but that alone isn't very useful. Jon also created
[libfxcg](https://github.com/Jonimoose/libfxcg), a library providing access to
the syscalls on the platform. Finally, I created
[mkg3a](http://www.taricorp.net/projects/mkg3a), a tool to pack the raw binaries
output by the linker into the g3a files accepted by the device.

Rumor has it the whole set of tools works. I haven't been able to verify that
myself since I don't have a Prizm of my own, but it's all out there. Tarballs of
the whole package are over on [Jon's
site](http://jonimoose.net/calcstuff/prizm/), for anyone interested.
